doc/bonaluna.rst, before:

..  BonaLuna

..  Copyright (C) 2010-2011 Christophe Delord
    http://www.cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html

..  BonaLuna is based on Lua 5.2
    Copyright (C) 2010 Lua.org, PUC-Rio.

..  Freely available under the terms of the Lua license.

=================
 |logo| BonaLuna
=================
-------------------------
 A compact Lua extension
-------------------------

.. |logo| image:: bl.png
.. |logo_lua| image:: http://www.andreas-rozek.de/Lua/Lua-Logo_64x64.png

.. sidebar:: Based on `Lua 5.2 <http://www.lua.org/work>`__ |logo_lua|

    Copyright (C) 2010 `Lua.org <http://www.lua.org>`__, PUC-Rio.

:Author: Christophe Delord
:Contact: cdelord@cdsoft.fr
:Web: http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html
:License:
    | Copyright (C) 2010-2011 Christophe Delord,
      `CDSoft.fr <http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html>`__
    | Freely available under the terms of the
      `Lua license <http://www.lua.org/license.html#5>`__
    | **Lua**: `Lua license <http://www.lua.org/license.html#5>`__
    | **miniLZO**, **QuickLZ**: GPL v2
    | **LZ4**: BSD
    | **libcurl**: `MIT/X derivate <http://curl.haxx.se/docs/copyright.html>`__
:Download: http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna-2.1.1.tgz

:Version: 2.1.1
:Abstract:
    BonaLuna is a Lua interpretor plus a few packages
    in a single executable.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :depth: 2

.. sectnum::
    :depth: 2

Lua
===

The original Lua interpretor and documentation is available
at http://www.lua.org.

BonaLuna is based on `Lua 5.2 <lua/contents.html>`__.

Global functions
================

Iterators
---------

**iter(sequence)** returns an iterator of `sequence` items (a table).

**list(iterator)** returns a table of items generated by `iterator`.

**reverse(iterator)** returns `iterator` in reverse order.

**sort(iterator [, cmp])** returns `iterator` sorted using `cmp` (as `table.sort`)

**map(f, ...)** applies `f` to iterators.

**zip(...)** groups values of the same rank of several iterators.

**filter(p, ...)** selects values according to the predicate `p`.

**range(i [, j [, s] ])** returns the values of the range [`i`, `j`].
`s` is the step.
`range(j)` is equivalent to `range(1, j)`. The default step is 1.

**enum(iterator)** generates tuples `(i, x[i])` where `i` is the rank of the value `x[i]` for each value of `iterator`.

**chain(...)** chains several iterators.

BonaLuna packages
=================

Note about objects
------------------

Objects defined in these packages uses closures [#]_ to store internal data.
No *self* is required and methods are called with a single dot (`.`),
not with a colon (`:`).

Example::

    aes = crypt.AES("my key", 128)
    encrypted = aes.encrypt("some text")

.. [#] See `Object Orientation Closure Approach <http://lua-users.org/wiki/ObjectOrientationClosureApproach>`__.

crypt: Cryptographic functions
------------------------------

The `crypt` package is a pure Lua package (i.e. not really fast).

**crypt.hex.encode(data)** encodes `data` in hexa.

**crypt.hex.decode(data)** decodes the hexa `data`.

**crypt.base64.encode(data)** encodes `data` in base64.

**crypt.base64.decode(data)** decodes the base64 `data`.

**crypt.crc32(data)** computes the CRC32 of `data`.

**crypt.shaXXX(data)** computes an SHA digest of `data`. `XXX` is 1, 224 or 256.

**crypt.AES(password [,keylen [,mode] ])** returns an AES codec.
`password` is the encryption/decryption key, `keylen` is the length
of the key (128 (default), 192 or 256), `mode` is the encryption/decryption
mode ("cbc" (default) or "ecb").
`crypt.AES` objects have two methods: `encrypt(data)` and `decrypt(data)`.

**crypt.random(bits)** returns a string with `bits` random bits.


curl: libcurl interface
-----------------------

`libcurl <http://curl.haxx.se/>`__ is multiprotocol file transfer library.
This package is a simple Lua interface to libcurl.

This package is based on `Lua-cURL <http://luaforge.net/projects/lua-curl/>`__
and provides the same API plus a few higher level objects.

This package was introduced before `socket` which is based on `Lua Socket`.
I recommend using `socket` instead of `curl`.

**curl.FTP(url [, login, password])** creates an FTP object to connect to
the FTP server at `url`. `login` and `password` are optional.
Methods are:

    - `cd(path)` changes the *current working directory*. No connection is
      made, `path` is just stored internally for later connections.

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `put(path, data)` sends and stores the string `data` to the file `path`.

    - `rm(path)` deletes the file `path`.

    - `mkdir(path)` creates the directory `path`.

    - `rmdir(path)` deletes the directory `path`.

    - `list(path)` returns an iterator listing the directory `path`.

FTP connections are made through the cURL easy interface, each request is in
fact an entire connection (and deconnection).

**curl.HTTP(url)** creates an HTTP object to connect to the HTTP server at `url`.
Methods are:

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `save(path [, name])` retrieves `path` and saves it to `name`.
      The default value of `name` is the basename of `path`.

fs: File System
---------------

**fs.getcwd()** returns the current working directory.

**fs.chdir(path)** changes the current directory to `path`.

**fs.listdir([path])** returns the list of files and directories in
`path` (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.dir([path])** returns an iterator listing files and directories in
`path` (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.walk([path])** returns an iterator listing directory and file names
in `path` and its subdirectories (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.mkdir(path)** creates a new directory `path`.

**fs.rename(old_name, new_name)** renames the file `old_name` to `new_name`.

**fs.remove(name)** deletes the file `name`.

**fs.copy(source_name, target_name)** copies file `source_name` to `target_name`.
The attributes and times are preserved.

**fs.stat(name)** reads attributes of the file `name`.  Attributes are:

    - `name`: name
    - type: "file" or "directory"
    - `size`: size in bytes
    - `mtime`, `atime`, `ctime`: modification, access and creation times.
    - `mode`: file permissions
    - `uR`, `uW`, `uX`: user Read/Write/eXecute permissions
    - `gR`, `gW`, `gX`: group Read/Write/eXecute permissions
    - `oR`, `oW`, `oX`: other Read/Write/eXecute permissions
    - `dev`, `ino`: device and inode numbers


**fs.chmod(name, other_file_name)** sets file `name` permissions as
file `other_file_name` (string containing the name of another file).

**fs.chmod(name, bit1, ..., bitn)** sets file `name` permissions as
`bit1` or ... or `bitn` (integers).

**fs.touch(name)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with the current time.

**fs.touch(name, number)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with `number`.

**fs.touch(name, other_name)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with the times of file `other_name`.

**fs.basename(path)** return the last component of path.

**fs.dirname(path)** return all but the last component of path.

**fs.absname(path)** return the absolute path name of path.


**fs.sep** is the directory separator (/ or \\).

**fs.uR, fs.uW, fs.uX** are the User Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.gR, fs.gW, fs.gX** are the Group Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.oR, fs.oW, fs.oX** are the Other Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.aR, fs.aW, fs.aX** are All Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

z, lzo, qlz, lz4, zlib, ucl, lzma: compression libraries
--------------------------------------------------------

Compression libraries are based on:
- `LZO <http://www.oberhumer.com/opensource/lzo/>`__
- `QuickLZ <http://www.quicklz.com/>`__
- `LZ4 <http://code.google.com/p/lz4/>`__
- `ZLIB <http://www.zlib.net/>`__
- `UCL <http://www.oberhumer.com/opensource/ucl/>`__
- `XZ Utils <http://tukaani.org/xz/>`__

It's inspired by the `Lua Lzo module <http://lua-users.org/wiki/LuaModuleLzo>`__.

Future versions of BonaLuna may remove or add some compression library.

Currently, only zlib is used in the default BonaLuna distribution
but you can change it in `setup`.

**z.compress(data)** compresses `data` using the best compressor and returns the compressed string.

**z.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` and returns the decompressed string.

**minilzo.compress(data)** compresses `data` with miniLZO and returns the compressed string.

**minilzo.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with miniLZO and returns the decompressed string.

**lzo.compress(data)** compresses `data` with LZO and returns the compressed string.

**lzo.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with LZO and returns the decompressed string.

**qlz.compress(data)** compresses `data` with QLZ and returns the compressed string.

**qlz.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with QLZ and returns the decompressed string.

**lz4.compress(data)** compresses `data` with LZ4 and returns the compressed string.

**lz4.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with LZ4 and returns the decompressed string.

**zlib.compress(data)** compresses `data` with ZLIB and returns the compressed string.

**zlib.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with ZLIB and returns the decompressed string.

**ucl.compress(data)** compresses `data` with UCL and returns the compressed string.

**ucl.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with UCL and returns the decompressed string.

**lzma.compress(data)** compresses `data` with XZ Utils and returns the compressed string.

**lzma.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with XZ Utils and returns the decompressed string.

ps: Processes
-------------

**ps.sleep(n)** sleeps for `n` seconds.

rl: readline
------------

The rl (readline) package was initially inspired by
`ilua <https://github.com/ilua>`_
and adapted for BonaLuna.

**rl.read(prompt)** prints `prompt` and returns the string entered by the user.

**rl.add(line)** adds `line` to the readline history (Linux only).


socket: Lua Socket (and networking tools)
-----------------------------------------

The socket package is based on `Lua Socket <http://w3.impa.br/~diego/software/luasocket/>`__
and adapted for BonaLuna.

The documentation of `Lua Socket` is available at the `Lua Socket documentation web site <http://w3.impa.br/~diego/software/luasocket/reference.html>`_.

This package also comes with the following functions.

**FTP(url [, login, password])** creates an FTP object to connect to
the FTP server at `url`. `login` and `password` are optional.
Methods are:

    - `cd(path)` changes the current working directory.

    - `pwd()` returns the current working directory.

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `put(path, data)` sends and stores the string `data` to the file `path`.

    - `rm(path)` deletes the file `path`.

    - `mkdir(path)` creates the directory `path`.

    - `rmdir(path)` deletes the directory `path`.

    - `list(path)` returns an iterator listing the directory `path`.

struct: (un)pack structures
---------------------------

The struct package is taken from
`Library for Converting Data to and from C Structs for Lua 5.1 <http://www.inf.puc-rio.br/~roberto/struct/>`_
and adapted for BonaLuna.

**struct.pack(fmt, d1, d2, ...)** returns a string containing the values `d1`, `d2`, etc. packed according to the format string `fmt`.

**struct.unpack(fmt, s, [i])** returns the values packed in string `s` according to the format string `fmt`. An optional `i` marks where in `s` to start reading (default is 1). After the read values, this function also returns the index in `s` where it stopped reading, which is also where you should start to read the rest of the string.

**struct.size(fmt)** returns the size of a string formatted according to the format string `fmt`. For obvious reasons, the format string cannot contain neither the option `s` nor the option `c0`.

sys: System management
----------------------

**sys.hostname()** returns the host name.

**sys.domainname()** returns the domain name.

**sys.hostid()** returns the host id.

**sys.platform** is `"Linux"` or `"Windows"`

Self running scripts
====================

It is possible to add scripts to the BonaLuna interpretor
to make a single executable file containing the interpretor
and some BonaLuna scripts.

This feature is inspired by
`srlua <http://www.tecgraf.puc-rio.br/~lhf/ftp/lua/#srlua>`__.

`pegar.lua` parameters
----------------------

**compile:on|off|min** turn compilation on, off or on when chunks are smaller than sources (`min` is the default value)

**compress:on|off|min** turn compression on, off or on when chunks are smaller than sources (`min` is the default value)

**read:original_interpretor** reads the initial interpretor

**lua:script.lua** adds a script to be executed at runtime

**lua:script.lua=realname.lua** as above but stored under a different name

**str:name=value** creates a global variable holding a string

**str:name=@filename** as above but the string is the content of a file

**file:name** adds a file to be created at runtime (the file is not overwritten if it already exists)

**file:name=realname** as above but stored under a different name

**dir:name** creates a directory at runtime

**write:new_executable** write a new executable containing the original interpretor and all the added items

When a path starts with `:`, it is relative to the executable path otherwise
it is relative to the current working directory.


Examples
========

This documentation has been generated by a BonaLuna script.
`bonaluna.lua <bonaluna.lua>`__ also contains some tests.

Commit message:

inode workaround improved
The getino function is slow. The dev and ino attributes
have been removed from the fs.stat function. A new fs.inode
functions has been introduced.

Minor bug fixed in build.sh (when LuaSocket is not used).

doc/bonaluna.rst, after:

..  BonaLuna

..  Copyright (C) 2010-2011 Christophe Delord
    http://www.cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html

..  BonaLuna is based on Lua 5.2
    Copyright (C) 2010 Lua.org, PUC-Rio.

..  Freely available under the terms of the Lua license.

=================
 |logo| BonaLuna
=================
-------------------------
 A compact Lua extension
-------------------------

.. |logo| image:: bl.png
.. |logo_lua| image:: http://www.andreas-rozek.de/Lua/Lua-Logo_64x64.png

.. sidebar:: Based on `Lua 5.2 <http://www.lua.org/work>`__ |logo_lua|

    Copyright (C) 2010 `Lua.org <http://www.lua.org>`__, PUC-Rio.

:Author: Christophe Delord
:Contact: cdelord@cdsoft.fr
:Web: http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html
:License:
    | Copyright (C) 2010-2011 Christophe Delord,
      `CDSoft.fr <http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna.html>`__
    | Freely available under the terms of the
      `Lua license <http://www.lua.org/license.html#5>`__
    | **Lua**: `Lua license <http://www.lua.org/license.html#5>`__
    | **miniLZO**, **QuickLZ**: GPL v2
    | **LZ4**: BSD
    | **libcurl**: `MIT/X derivate <http://curl.haxx.se/docs/copyright.html>`__
:Download: http://cdsoft.fr/bl/bonaluna-2.1.2.tgz

:Version: 2.1.2
:Abstract:
    BonaLuna is a Lua interpretor plus a few packages
    in a single executable.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :depth: 2

.. sectnum::
    :depth: 2

Lua
===

The original Lua interpretor and documentation is available
at http://www.lua.org.

BonaLuna is based on `Lua 5.2 <lua/contents.html>`__.

Global functions
================

Iterators
---------

**iter(sequence)** returns an iterator of `sequence` items (a table).

**list(iterator)** returns a table of items generated by `iterator`.

**reverse(iterator)** returns `iterator` in reverse order.

**sort(iterator [, cmp])** returns `iterator` sorted using `cmp` (as `table.sort`)

**map(f, ...)** applies `f` to iterators.

**zip(...)** groups values of the same rank of several iterators.

**filter(p, ...)** selects values according to the predicate `p`.

**range(i [, j [, s] ])** returns the values of the range [`i`, `j`].
`s` is the step.
`range(j)` is equivalent to `range(1, j)`. The default step is 1.

**enum(iterator)** generates tuples `(i, x[i])` where `i` is the rank of the value `x[i]` for each value of `iterator`.

**chain(...)** chains several iterators.

BonaLuna packages
=================

Note about objects
------------------

Objects defined in these packages uses closures [#]_ to store internal data.
No *self* is required and methods are called with a single dot (`.`),
not with a colon (`:`).

Example::

    aes = crypt.AES("my key", 128)
    encrypted = aes.encrypt("some text")

.. [#] See `Object Orientation Closure Approach <http://lua-users.org/wiki/ObjectOrientationClosureApproach>`__.

crypt: Cryptographic functions
------------------------------

The `crypt` package is a pure Lua package (i.e. not really fast).

**crypt.hex.encode(data)** encodes `data` in hexa.

**crypt.hex.decode(data)** decodes the hexa `data`.

**crypt.base64.encode(data)** encodes `data` in base64.

**crypt.base64.decode(data)** decodes the base64 `data`.

**crypt.crc32(data)** computes the CRC32 of `data`.

**crypt.shaXXX(data)** computes an SHA digest of `data`. `XXX` is 1, 224 or 256.

**crypt.AES(password [,keylen [,mode] ])** returns an AES codec.
`password` is the encryption/decryption key, `keylen` is the length
of the key (128 (default), 192 or 256), `mode` is the encryption/decryption
mode ("cbc" (default) or "ecb").
`crypt.AES` objects have two methods: `encrypt(data)` and `decrypt(data)`.

**crypt.random(bits)** returns a string with `bits` random bits.


curl: libcurl interface
-----------------------

`libcurl <http://curl.haxx.se/>`__ is multiprotocol file transfer library.
This package is a simple Lua interface to libcurl.

This package is based on `Lua-cURL <http://luaforge.net/projects/lua-curl/>`__
and provides the same API plus a few higher level objects.

This package was introduced before `socket` which is based on `Lua Socket`.
I recommend using `socket` instead of `curl`.

**curl.FTP(url [, login, password])** creates an FTP object to connect to
the FTP server at `url`. `login` and `password` are optional.
Methods are:

    - `cd(path)` changes the *current working directory*. No connection is
      made, `path` is just stored internally for later connections.

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `put(path, data)` sends and stores the string `data` to the file `path`.

    - `rm(path)` deletes the file `path`.

    - `mkdir(path)` creates the directory `path`.

    - `rmdir(path)` deletes the directory `path`.

    - `list(path)` returns an iterator listing the directory `path`.

FTP connections are made through the cURL easy interface, each request is in
fact an entire connection (and deconnection).

**curl.HTTP(url)** creates an HTTP object to connect to the HTTP server at `url`.
Methods are:

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `save(path [, name])` retrieves `path` and saves it to `name`.
      The default value of `name` is the basename of `path`.

fs: File System
---------------

**fs.getcwd()** returns the current working directory.

**fs.chdir(path)** changes the current directory to `path`.

**fs.listdir([path])** returns the list of files and directories in
`path` (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.dir([path])** returns an iterator listing files and directories in
`path` (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.walk([path])** returns an iterator listing directory and file names
in `path` and its subdirectories (the default path is the current directory).

**fs.mkdir(path)** creates a new directory `path`.

**fs.rename(old_name, new_name)** renames the file `old_name` to `new_name`.

**fs.remove(name)** deletes the file `name`.

**fs.copy(source_name, target_name)** copies file `source_name` to `target_name`.
The attributes and times are preserved.

**fs.stat(name)** reads attributes of the file `name`.  Attributes are:

    - `name`: name
    - type: "file" or "directory"
    - `size`: size in bytes
    - `mtime`, `atime`, `ctime`: modification, access and creation times.
    - `mode`: file permissions
    - `uR`, `uW`, `uX`: user Read/Write/eXecute permissions
    - `gR`, `gW`, `gX`: group Read/Write/eXecute permissions
    - `oR`, `oW`, `oX`: other Read/Write/eXecute permissions

**fs.inode(name)** reads device and inode attributes of the file `name`.
Attributes are:

    - `dev`, `ino`: device and inode numbers


**fs.chmod(name, other_file_name)** sets file `name` permissions as
file `other_file_name` (string containing the name of another file).

**fs.chmod(name, bit1, ..., bitn)** sets file `name` permissions as
`bit1` or ... or `bitn` (integers).

**fs.touch(name)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with the current time.

**fs.touch(name, number)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with `number`.

**fs.touch(name, other_name)** sets the access time and the modification time of file `name` with the times of file `other_name`.

**fs.basename(path)** return the last component of path.

**fs.dirname(path)** return all but the last component of path.

**fs.absname(path)** return the absolute path name of path.


**fs.sep** is the directory separator (/ or \\).

**fs.uR, fs.uW, fs.uX** are the User Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.gR, fs.gW, fs.gX** are the Group Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.oR, fs.oW, fs.oX** are the Other Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

**fs.aR, fs.aW, fs.aX** are All Read/Write/eXecute mask for `fs.chmod`.

z, lzo, qlz, lz4, zlib, ucl, lzma: compression libraries
--------------------------------------------------------

Compression libraries are based on:
- `LZO <http://www.oberhumer.com/opensource/lzo/>`__
- `QuickLZ <http://www.quicklz.com/>`__
- `LZ4 <http://code.google.com/p/lz4/>`__
- `ZLIB <http://www.zlib.net/>`__
- `UCL <http://www.oberhumer.com/opensource/ucl/>`__
- `XZ Utils <http://tukaani.org/xz/>`__

It's inspired by the `Lua Lzo module <http://lua-users.org/wiki/LuaModuleLzo>`__.

Future versions of BonaLuna may remove or add some compression library.

Currently, only zlib is used in the default BonaLuna distribution
but you can change it in `setup`.

**z.compress(data)** compresses `data` using the best compressor and returns the compressed string.

**z.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` and returns the decompressed string.

**minilzo.compress(data)** compresses `data` with miniLZO and returns the compressed string.

**minilzo.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with miniLZO and returns the decompressed string.

**lzo.compress(data)** compresses `data` with LZO and returns the compressed string.

**lzo.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with LZO and returns the decompressed string.

**qlz.compress(data)** compresses `data` with QLZ and returns the compressed string.

**qlz.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with QLZ and returns the decompressed string.

**lz4.compress(data)** compresses `data` with LZ4 and returns the compressed string.

**lz4.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with LZ4 and returns the decompressed string.

**zlib.compress(data)** compresses `data` with ZLIB and returns the compressed string.

**zlib.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with ZLIB and returns the decompressed string.

**ucl.compress(data)** compresses `data` with UCL and returns the compressed string.

**ucl.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with UCL and returns the decompressed string.

**lzma.compress(data)** compresses `data` with XZ Utils and returns the compressed string.

**lzma.decompress(data)** decompresses `data` with XZ Utils and returns the decompressed string.

ps: Processes
-------------

**ps.sleep(n)** sleeps for `n` seconds.

rl: readline
------------

The rl (readline) package was initially inspired by
`ilua <https://github.com/ilua>`_
and adapted for BonaLuna.

**rl.read(prompt)** prints `prompt` and returns the string entered by the user.

**rl.add(line)** adds `line` to the readline history (Linux only).


socket: Lua Socket (and networking tools)
-----------------------------------------

The socket package is based on `Lua Socket <http://w3.impa.br/~diego/software/luasocket/>`__
and adapted for BonaLuna.

The documentation of `Lua Socket` is available at the `Lua Socket documentation web site <http://w3.impa.br/~diego/software/luasocket/reference.html>`_.

This package also comes with the following functions.

**FTP(url [, login, password])** creates an FTP object to connect to
the FTP server at `url`. `login` and `password` are optional.
Methods are:

    - `cd(path)` changes the current working directory.

    - `pwd()` returns the current working directory.

    - `get(path)` retrieves `path`.

    - `put(path, data)` sends and stores the string `data` to the file `path`.

    - `rm(path)` deletes the file `path`.

    - `mkdir(path)` creates the directory `path`.

    - `rmdir(path)` deletes the directory `path`.

    - `list(path)` returns an iterator listing the directory `path`.

struct: (un)pack structures
---------------------------

The struct package is taken from
`Library for Converting Data to and from C Structs for Lua 5.1 <http://www.inf.puc-rio.br/~roberto/struct/>`_
and adapted for BonaLuna.

**struct.pack(fmt, d1, d2, ...)** returns a string containing the values `d1`, `d2`, etc. packed according to the format string `fmt`.

**struct.unpack(fmt, s, [i])** returns the values packed in string `s` according to the format string `fmt`. An optional `i` marks where in `s` to start reading (default is 1). After the read values, this function also returns the index in `s` where it stopped reading, which is also where you should start to read the rest of the string.

**struct.size(fmt)** returns the size of a string formatted according to the format string `fmt`. For obvious reasons, the format string cannot contain neither the option `s` nor the option `c0`.

sys: System management
----------------------

**sys.hostname()** returns the host name.

**sys.domainname()** returns the domain name.

**sys.hostid()** returns the host id.

**sys.platform** is `"Linux"` or `"Windows"`

Self running scripts
====================

It is possible to add scripts to the BonaLuna interpretor
to make a single executable file containing the interpretor
and some BonaLuna scripts.

This feature is inspired by
`srlua <http://www.tecgraf.puc-rio.br/~lhf/ftp/lua/#srlua>`__.

`pegar.lua` parameters
----------------------

**compile:on|off|min** turn compilation on, off or on when chunks are smaller than sources (`min` is the default value)

**compress:on|off|min** turn compression on, off or on when chunks are smaller than sources (`min` is the default value)

**read:original_interpretor** reads the initial interpretor

**lua:script.lua** adds a script to be executed at runtime

**lua:script.lua=realname.lua** as above but stored under a different name

**str:name=value** creates a global variable holding a string

**str:name=@filename** as above but the string is the content of a file

**file:name** adds a file to be created at runtime (the file is not overwritten if it already exists)

**file:name=realname** as above but stored under a different name

**dir:name** creates a directory at runtime

**write:new_executable** write a new executable containing the original interpretor and all the added items

When a path starts with `:`, it is relative to the executable path otherwise
it is relative to the current working directory.


Examples
========

This documentation has been generated by a BonaLuna script.
`bonaluna.lua <bonaluna.lua>`__ also contains some tests.
